# Day 1 Review

The first day of class was largely about setting the stage for moving from "Angular newbie" into applying Angular as a team to produce real code and applications.

## What is Angular For?

Generally, Angular is for building "applications". It is not usually the best bet for creating "web sites". 

We can define applications here as, opposed to web sites or web applications, having local state (data in memory) and code that processes that data.
  - Web sites are "static" - just a series of HTML pages that the user can retrieve. Like documentation, etc.
  - Web applications use server-side processing for the predominance of the work. Programmed with frameworks like ASP.NET MVC, PHP, Ruby On Rails, etc.
  - "Apps" like we build with Angular, React, Vue, Svelte, Solid, etc. usually require no specific server-side framework to function (aside from APIs to call),
    - Delivered as static resources - mostly JavaScript, css, images, and an Index.html file.
    - Sometimes called "Single Page Applications"
  
Use Angular when neither static, nor server-side applications will meet the needs of how the user interface will work. Frontend apps should not be seen so much as an evolution - e.g. the "best" way to create applications for the web, but as an advanced tool for applications that cannot easily be created using other methods.

## How Does Angular "Work"

The developer (you!) writes code using:
- The TypeScript Programming Language (which is a "superset" of JavaScript)
- Creating templates that are a superset of HTML
- Creating CSS for styling
- Using the Angular Framework - which is the code in the `@angular/*` packages
  - These are often used by importing `decorators` (.NET programmers, or Java Programmers would call these `attributes`). For example `@Component`, `@Directive`, etc.
  - These are "hooks" through which the Angular runtime can "recognize" your code and provide additional functionality.
- Using various libraries as expedients.
  - Additional packages, like `rxjs`, `date-fns`, `@ngrx/signals`, etc.
  - Some libraries are "general purpose" and can be used in many applications written in TypeScript/JavaScript, like `rxjs`, `date-fns` - these can be used in React, Vue, vanilla TypeScript, and even server side node applications.
  - Some libraries are not usable if you are not using Angular - they add to Angular, and suppose Angular is present (they actually 'check' on installation) - for example `@ngrx/signals`, `@ng-icon`.
  - Library authors of libraries like this specify in their `package.json` these "peer dependencies", along with a version or a range of versions it is expecting.
    - This can cause confusion.
  
### Components

Angular applications express themselves as a hierarchy of components, with a single component being the "parent" of all the components used in the application (here the `/src/app/app.ts` with the selector of `app-root`).

Components can receive data from its parent through an `input`.

Components can invoke code on its parent with an `output`.

The "prime directive" for components is something like:
  - A component is a unit of related user interface. 
  - Components must accurately project the application state to the user, usually in a way that allows the user to take some sort of action on that state.
  - Components provide affordances through which the user can express their intention to directly manipulate that state.

That's all a fancy way of saying you use components to do things like say "Here is your current back balance", and then maybe a form with an input and the choice to make a deposit or withdrawal, or transfer.

> **Note**: It's that "state" part where signals come in, the topic of this morning.

## The Development Environment

- Angular uses [Vite](https://vite.dev/) for the development server.
  - This is a great improvement in developer experience - faster, requiring far fewer app reloads (uses "Hot Module Replacement")
  - One warning - Angular "wraps" vite with the Angular CLI, (`ng serve`) - don't get too excited reading about all the cool things you can do with vite (there are some really cool things), as most of these things aren't available in the Angular usage. I hope that changes in the future ([https://analogjs.org/](https://analogjs.org/) is a "meta framework" for Angular that adds a lot of really nice features, key amongst them not burying Vite and vite config.)

- You can and should create ways that the developers on your team have as much friction removed as possible.
  - Create an `/.vscode/extensions.json` listing all the team recommended extensions for working in this code base.
  - Create an `/.vscode/settings.json` for settings that are helpful or required while working in this application.
  - Create code snippets in the `/.vscode/*.code-snippets` files for anything that is "boiler plate"
    - Snippets are powerful, but fairly dumb (limited) - often the more "boiler plate" things are better accomplished using [Angular Schematics](https://angular.dev/tools/cli/schematics-authoring)
      - These can be complicated and tedious to create - so you may not see many of these currently (other than the ones that ship with the Angular CLI (like `ng generate xxx` commands, for example))
        - LLM and AI coding assistants are *really good* at creating these for you. So, before it might take a fairly skilled developer hours or days to create a schematic, this can be done in minutes by an LLM.
        - Schematics can do things like create new files according to templates you provide (like snippets)
        - Add new packages, etc.
        - Modify existing code (this is often the big one for me)
        - For example, the schematic included as a sample in this project allows you to generate a new feature area, which has a landing page and route.
          - It generates the files in the `src/app/areas/` for you.
          - It adds a route to the `src/app/app.routes.ts`
          - It adds a link in the `src/app/app.ts` file.
    - Making the right thing the easiest thing to do is always, in my opinion, worth the effort.

- The three dueling tyrants:
  - The `tsconfig` files contain rules for how TypeScript should be compiled, etc. 
  - The `eslint.config.ts` contains preferences about coding standards and idioms that our typescript code (and templates) should follow.
  - The `.prettierrc` contains rules on how our code should be formatted.
  
I call this "dueling tyrants" because they are all "cops" in some way - enforcing standards - and there are areas of overlap between them. Each of these tools were developed by separate teams at separate timelines, so tsconfig has some rules that have to do with code formatting, for example, as does eslint.

Be very careful on not creating "paradox" configurations - where one tool thinks we should be using tabs, and the other thinks we should use spaces, for example. 

For eslint, there is a schematic you can use: https://github.com/angular-eslint/angular-eslint

The Angular CLI generates your `tsconfig.*` files, and now creates a `.prettierrc` configuration file to get you started.

Make sure you install `prettier` and `eslint` as dev dependencies (if they aren't already there), and the associated VS Code extensions for editor integration.

I also add some npm scripts in the `package.json` to invoke this.
  - I am not a big fan of using git hooks for things like pre-commit tasks to run. That's just me - if you use them (like husky or something) have these commands run as part of that.

Here are the npm scripts I use:

```json
    "lint": "ng lint",
    "format": "npx prettier --write ."
```



## Style Guide

- The official Angular style guide is [here](https://angular.dev/style-guide)
  - Key Points
    - ["Group closely related files together in the same directory"](https://angular.dev/style-guide#group-closely-related-files-together-in-the-same-directory)
      - What this is saying is also what you *shouldn't* do - which is organize your code according to technical functionality.
      - That would be like having root level (e.g. `/src/app`) directories named things like "controllers", "services", "utils", etc. - don't do that.
    - ["Organize your project by feature areas"](https://angular.dev/style-guide#organize-your-project-by-feature-areas)
      - In this starter app, these are `/src/app/areas/*`
      - "features" are usually functionality aligned with business requirements.
        - Examples: `shopping-cart`, `products`, `user-preferences`, etc.
        - Features can contain `pages` (this is a commonly used term to indicate a component that is a target of routing, as opposed to being "invoked" by it's selector)
          - Pages aggregate or bring together other components. In old-school parlance, these would often be the "smart" components.

The "Take Away" - you and your team should establish some guidelines around project structure and organization. Some questions you can ask as you design this structure:
  - Is it easy for developers to locate code related to a specific business requirement or technical requirement?
  - Is the structure organized in a way that allows the most autonomy for a developer working on a particular feature?
    - A 'feature area' organization allows the developer or developers working on that particular feature the ability to refactor components, services, etc. without worry that it will negatively impact other parts of the application.
    - A "feature area" should *never* use code from another feature area. Features need to evolve independently from one another.
  - Code that must be shared across more than one feature is a sort of feature itself.
    - In my project, that is the `src/app/areas/shared/*` stuff. 
    - As the name implies these are for cross-cutting concerns. 
    - Consider requiring changes to shared resources to be on pull requests that are separate from any other changes so it is easy for all to see what the impact might be.
    - Shared resources often need more "general" testing that resources in feature areas.
      - Feature area resources (components, services, directives, etc.) can usually be tested by exercising them in the context of how the user will experience them.
      - Shared resources don't have the benefit of that specificity - they are more general, and tests have to be a bit more "speculative".
        - These for shared resources also have the benefit of being reliable documentation for developers using these resources.
  - Packages
    - The "ultimate" level of "shared resource" is a package.
    - These are installed by NPM and our application specifies what version we depend upon (in package.json) and which versions we are actually using (package-lock.json)
    - Teams can create packages to be shared across applications
      - Think long and hard before doing this though - if you are creating packages that will have frequent changes that the consumers of those packages *must* use, you can create big issues with deployment - creating what is often called a "distributed monolith". 
      - Likewise, be as conservative as you can about what packages you do take a dependency on. 
        - One project I work on requires the addition of any new NPM package to be in a PR all by itself that must be approved by all members of the team. I'm not necessarily saying you should do that - but using that as an indication of the level of care you should consider when adding a new package.


## Additional Thing To Consider

I've hinted at how we are working as developers in a particular mode when we are coding features for our app. We are in the mode of "application developer" - which means shipping code to solve a particular problem or specific functionality. The processes and patterns we emphasize while doing this are have a different emphasis than when we are creating "shared code" for others to use in our application. We are creating code with more "general" usage expectations - more "paranoid" Unit Tests might be needed to validate inputs etc.

Another thing to consider is that when you are working in the "Application Developer" mode creating components is primarily to make your code more intention revealing, simpler, or even as a way to "branch" the code so multiple developers can contribute simultaneously to the same feature. (e.g. "Hey Sue, why don't you work on the table filter component, while I work on the table part?")

As an application developer, your primary use of creating components is not for the potential for "reuse". They are often more of a refactoring. 

Creating code intended for reuse requires different thinking, testing, and even idioms (for example, for reasons I'll show later, as an "Application Developer" I don't create many components with outputs, and even not many with inputs. Inputs and outputs are a way to parameterize, thus generalize, the use of a component. I usually accomplish what I need by having components share services - there is more coupling for sure, but more "legibility")

When I am working on general stuff, "shared" components, services, the mindset is very different.

I think some of the biggest confusion we have comes from not identifying the mode in which we are working. We have a tendency to want "one way" to do things, and if you have "one way", it typically has to be the way that accommodates every other way. This often introduces unneeded complexity, process, etc. that comes at the cost of shipping code. 

Examples:

- There is a different set of tests you would write for a component that is simply a extracted (refactored) component used in one part of your application vs. a component that is meant to be shared across your application, or even bundled in a package for other applications to use.
- Documentation often does not make this distinction.
  - Angular's documentation on component testing is based on creating shared components.
  - The guidance for using `{providedIn: 'root'}` on services is probably great guidance for library authors - (and even that I'm a bit skeptical of), but probably isn't what you should be doing as an application developer (we'll talk about this later).
